layout | title | permalink--|--|--page | About | /about/I am a first year Ph.D. student at the University of Rhode Island in the Putnam Eco-Physiology and Environmental Epigenetics of Marine Invertebrates Laboratory. I am broadly interested in the ecophysiology within coral reef ecosystems and how global climate change and epigenetic processes influence coral population dynamics for generations to come.I am dedicated to open, rigorous, and reproducible experiments, data, and analyses that can help enhance scientific learning and propel research forward. ### **More Information**[Personal Website](http://daniellebecker.weebly.com)[Putnam Lab Website](http://putnamlab.com)### **Contact me**[danielle_becker@my.uri.edu](mailto:danielle_becker@uri.edu)## <div align="center">**DANIELLE M. BECKER**</div><center>Department of Biological Sciences</center><center>University of Rhode Island</center><center>120 Flagg Road, Kingston RI 02881</center>## **Curriculum Vitae**### **POSITIONS HELD**Time|Position| Affiliation--|--|--2018-2020    | Graduate Research Assistant | California State University, Northridge (CSUN)2018-2019    | Teaching Associate: Biological Principles I (x5) | California State University, Northridge (CSUN)2018      | Teaching Assistant: Coral Reef Ecology |  Bermuda Institute of Ocean Sciences (BIOS)2018      | Research Assistant | BIOS2017      | Research Assistant | BIOS2017      | Teaching Assistant: Coral Reef Ecology Course | BIOS2017      | Teaching Assistant: Marine Biology and Oceanographic Research Course | BIOS2017      | Coral Reef Field and Research Assistant | Velaa Private Island, Maldives2016      | Galbraith/Wardman Fellow & Research Intern | BIOS and Eckerd College### **EDUCATION**Date|Position| Affiliation --|--|--Present |    PhD in Evolution and Marine Biology | University of Rhode Island- |Dissertation| In Development- 2020 |    MSc in Biology | California State University, Northridge (CSUN) |Thesis| The influence of nutrient and sediment loading on multiple facets of coral functionality in branching coral species- 2016|  BSc | Eckerd College| Major | Marine Science- 2012-2013| University of Wisconsin, Whitewater | Major | Marine Biology### **PUBLICATIONS**[Google Scholar Profile](https://scholar.google.com/citations?user=b1FueckAAAAJ&hl=en)4. **Becker, D. M.**, Putnam H.M., Burkepile D.E., Adam T.C., Vega Thurber R., and Silbiger N.J. (in review)Chronic low-level nutrient enrichment benefits coral thermal performance in a fore reef habitat.*Coral Reefs*.3. **Becker, D. M.**, Silbiger, N. J. 2020. Nutrient and sediment loading affect multiple facets of coral functionality in a tropical branching coral, *Journal of Experimental Biology*.2. Goodbody-Gringley, G., Wong, K.H., **Becker, D.M.**, Glennon, K., and de Putron, S.J. 2018. Recruitment potential of the brooding coral, *Porites astreoides*, increases from shallow to mesophotic zones, *Coral Reefs*, 37:483–4941. van Ginkel, C., **Becker, D.M.**, Gowans, S. and Simard, P. 2017. Whistling in a noisy ocean: bottlenose dolphins adjust whistle frequencies in response to real-time ambient noise levels, *Bioacoustics*, 27:391–405	   ### **RESEARCH GRANTS & AWARDS**2020        URI, Office of the Provost, the Vice President of Research and Economic                Development, and the Dean of the Graduate School Enhancement of Graduate                Research Award ($1,000)2020        CSUN, Department of Biology Donald E. Bianchi Outstanding Graduate Research Award ($400)2019        CSUN, Scholarship Department Mabel Wilson Richards Scholarship ($2,500)2019        CSUN, Research and Graduate Studies Travel Award ($500) March 20202019        CSUN, Research and Graduate Studies Travel Award ($500)2019        CSUN, College of Science and Mathematics Graduate Promise in Research Fellowship ($5,000)2019        CSUN, College of Science and Mathematics Leslie and Terry Cutler Scholarship ($2,000)2019        CSUN, Research and Graduate Studies Robert H. Schiffman Memorial Award for Outstanding Research                Promise ($750)2019        National Science Foundation (NSF), Graduate Research Fellowship Program ($34,000 x 3 annually)2019        CSUN, Office of Graduate Studies Thesis/Dissertation Support Program ($900)2018        American Academy of Underwater Sciences (AAUS), Masters Research Scholarship ($1,500)2018        CSUN, Office of Graduate Studies Graduate Equity Fellowship ($3,000)2018        CSUN, Associated Students Scholarship ($2,000)2018        CSUN, Office of Graduate Studies Out of State Fees Waiver ($3,000)2018        CSUN, Department of Biology Tuition Waiver ($7,300 annually)2017        BIOS, University Programs Scholarship ($2,000)2016        BIOS & Eckerd College, Galbraith/Wardman Fellowship ($2,000)2011-2012       Eckerd College, Trustee Academic Scholarship ($10,000 annually)2014-2016 ### **PROFESSIONAL PRESENTATIONS****Becker, D.M.*** 2020. The influence of nutrient and sediment loading on multiple facets of coralfunctionality in branching coral species. Thesis Defense; May 13th, 2020 [oral].**Becker, D.M.***, Silbiger, N.J., 2019. Investigating the influence of nutrient enrichment coral thermal performance in a        branching coral species. CSUNposium (24th Annual Student Research and Creative Works Symposium) [oral].        **Becker, D.M.***, Silbiger, N.J., 2019. Investigating the effects of nutrient and sediment loading on coral thermal        tolerance in a branching coral species, *Pocillopora acuta*. 2020 Ocean Sciences Meeting [poster].**Becker, D.M.***, Silbiger, N.J., 2019. Investigating the effects of nutrient and sediment loading on coral thermal        tolerance in a branching coral species. Moorea Coral Reef Long-term Ecological Research (MCR LTER) All        Investigators Meeting [oral].**Becker, D.M.***, Silbiger, N.J., 2019. Investigating the effects of nutrient and sediment loading on coral thermal        tolerance in a branching coral species. Western Society of Naturalists Annual Meeting [oral].**Becker, D.M.***, Silbiger, N.J., 2019. Investigating the effects of land-based pollution on coral thermal tolerance in a        branching coral species, Pocillopora acuta. CSU Council on Ocean Affairs, Science and Technology (COAST)        Annual Meeting, Lightning Talk [oral].**Becker, D.M.***, Silbiger, N.J., 2019. Investigating the effects of land-based pollution on coral thermal tolerance in a        branching coral species, Pocillopora acuta. CSUNposium (23rd Annual Student Research and Creative Works        Symposium) [poster].**Becker, D.M.***, Simard, P. 2016. Whistling in a noisy ocean: bottlenose dolphins adjust whistle frequencies in        response to real-time ambient noise levels. Eckerd College Scientific Research Symposium. Eckerd College, St.        Petersburg, FL [poster and oral]**Becker, D.M.***, Barry, M., and Goldstein, N. 2016. Examining the abundance of microplastics in sediment within        Tampa Bay. Chemical and Physical Oceanography Research Symposium. Eckerd College, St. Petersburg, FL        [poster and oral]Goodbody-Gringley, G.*, Wong, K.H., **Becker, D.M.**, Glennon, K., and de Putron, S. 2017. Reproductive ecology        and early life history traits of the brooding coral, Porites astreoides, from shallow to mesophotic zones. European        Coral Reef Symposium, Oxford, England [oral]### **MENTORING**2019        Maria Martone, Undergraduate at CSUN2019        Julio Rosales, Undergraduate at CSUN2018        Amy Amatya, Undergraduate at Princeton University, BIOS2017        Hallie Repeta, Undergraduate at Roger Williams University, BIOS2017        Sydney Smith, Undergraduate at the University of Rhode Island, BIOS2017        Sydney Guertin, Undergraduate at Roger Williams University, BIOS2017        Evan Ernst, Undergraduate at the University of Rhode Island, BIOS2017        Elizabeth Molnar, Undergraduate at the University of Rhode Island, BIOS2017        Amelia Bianchi, Undergraduate at Roger Williams University, BIOS### **PROFESSIONAL ASSOCIATIONS**American Academy of Underwater Sciences, American Geophysical Union, International Coral Reef Society, Research Coordinated Network for Evolution in Changing Seas, URI Society for Women in Marine Science (SWMS), Southern California Academy of Sciences, URI Voices of Inclusion in Communities of Education and Science (VOICES), Western Society of Naturalists, Women in STEM (WiSTEM) L.A. Initiative### **SKILLS AND TRAINING CERTIFICATIONS**####*Skills*Proficient in R and Rstudio, GitHub, Raven Software, Ocean Data View (ODV), Image J, AdobePhotoshop 2017, Adobe Illustrator 2020, HOBOwareQualified Rescue SCUBA diver with > 300 dives####*Training Certifications*2019-Present        Motorboat Operator Training Course Certification2019-Present        California Boater Safety Certification2018-Present        Divers Alert Network (DAN), First Aid for Hazardous Marine Life Injuries Certification2018-Present        DAN, Neurological Assessment Certification2018-Present        American Heart Association, CPR & First Aid2018-Present        American Safety Training Institute, Emergency Oxygen and Bloodborne Pathogens2017-Present        Autoclave Training2017-Present        PADI Enriched Air Diver2016-2018            Bermuda Lionfish Culling Permit2016-Present        PCR Training2016-Present        AAUS Scientific Diver, certified up to 60 feet2016-Present        PADI Rescue Diver Certification2015-Present        DAN, Guardian Member Insurance2015-Present        PADI Advanced Open Water Scuba Certification2014-Present        PADI Open Water Scuba Certification2008-Present        U.S. Coast Guard Auxiliary Boating Safety Certification### **Professional Service**####*Open Science and Community Resources*[GitHub](https://github.com/daniellembecker)####*Journal Reviewing*Marine Pollution Bulletin####*Leadership and Membership*2020-Present Member, VOICES, URI2020-Present Member, Society for Women in Marine Science (SWMS), URI